w ngesengeso v.s.redup. helpful; supportive
w ngeseu n. xx;
e Ak ulengit a ngeseu er a chim. --I need a helping hand.
e Ak ulengit a ngeseu er a udoud. --I need some financial help.
w Ngesias n. hamlet in Beliliou; 
r Ng ko er a chad er a Ngesias, el ngemuu er a mla mokom. --It's like when the men of Ngesias clamored over what they had lost (after a party of raiders had attacked without warning and taken a head as a trophy)./Don't cry over split milk.
w ngesil n. wedelia plant (Wedelia biflora)
w ngesngas n. red coral
w ngeso n. xx;
ngesuil n.poss.3sg.
p el okiu a ngeso (er a...) --with the help of
v melas v.t. xx;
ngosur ngmas ngilsur ngilas
- ngesuul  v.a.s. is to be reduced in number or subtracted
- nglas v.r.s. reduced in number; subtracted
- melselas v.t.redup. keep removing or extracting smth from 
v melatech v.t. xx;
- ngetachel v.a.s. is to be cleaned, scrubbed or washed
v melilt v.t. xx;
- ngetall v.a.s. is to be chosen or elected
w Ngetbang n. village in W. Babeldaob
w Ngetelkou n. location in Angaur
w Ngetelngal n. old name for Melekeok 
w ngetemakl v.s. (man, canoe etc.) slow-moving
w Ngetkib n. hamlet in Irrai; 
- Itkib n. Ngetkib (used in certain fixed expressions)
w Ngetkoang n. hamlet in Beliliou
w Ngetmeduch n. mangrove area in Koror;
r Ng ko er a meas er a Ngetmeduch, el di ngii el oltak er ngii er a derau. --He's like the rabbit fish in Ngetmeduch, which jumps into the net (seemingly) of its own will. --i.e. He always drops by without having been invited.
w ngiao n. sound of cat meowing; meow;
- oungiao, oungao v.i. (cat) meow
w ngiaos n. xx;
p er a ngiosel --three days from now;
p er a ikrel ngiosel --four or more days from now
w ngibes n. xx;
ngebsel, ngbesel n.poss.3sg.
w ngibeserreng n. desire to acquire smth; sexual desire 
w ngibt n. mucus (from mouth); slime; 
ngebtel n.poss.3sg.
p ngebtel a katatsumuri --sticky secretion from snail
w ngidech n. climbing fern (Lygodium circanatum); large food basket made from ngidech plant
v meloik v.t. xx;
- ngikall v.a.s. is to be danced;
e Te meloik er a karekimenai. --They're dancing "karekimenai".
v meliik v.t. remove (excrement) with showel;
ngikii ngmiik ngilikii ngiliik 
- ngikall v.a.s. (excrement) is to be removed
- ngliik v.r.s (excrement) removed 
w ngikel n. xx;
ngkelel n.poss.3sg.
w ngimech n. drop (of liquid)
v olengimech v.caus. put (liquid) into eye, container etc. drop by drop; v.i. drip
w ngimes n. type of  trepang; (edible) intestine of trepang;
v olengimes v.i. collect ngimes (and remove intestine by stretching until it breaks); v.caus. stretch (anything elastic)
w ngimetekl v.i. (ocean) becomes temporarily shallow (because of action of waves or current)
w ngingaibudel v.s. = ngaibebudel
w ngingd n. sound of groaning;
- ongingd v.i. groan
w ngiklel n.oblig.poss. (action of) cooking ongraol;
p A ngiklel a ongraol a urerir a redil. --Cooking ongraol is women's work. 
v meliokl v.t. cook or boil (ongraol) in water;
ngiklii ngiokl ngiliklii ngiliokl 
- ngeliokl v.r.s. ; n.r.s. (ongraol) being cooked;
- ngisall v.a.s (ongraol) is to be cooked or boiled in water; (tapioca) just ripe for boiling; 
w ulisall n. water remaining after boiling ongraol 
w mengingiokl v.erg.redup. (ongraol) easy to cook 
w ngira n. title used by males; Mr. 
w Ngiraidechiil n. legendary figure; 
r Ng ko er a dechil a Ngiraidechiil el dirk bengel. --It's like the first drop of feces of Ngiraidechiil. --i.e. the best or worst is yet to come.
w Ngirakebou n. title of chiefs in Ngchesar
w Ngiraked n. title of chiefs in Irrai
w ngirt n. xx;
e Ng tuobed a ngertel. --His nose is running.
w Ngirturong n. title of chiefs in Ngeremlengui 
w Ngiselacheos n. legendary child who hatched out of an egg found by Dirrabkau near a blacheos tree
w ngisumech n. xx;
- kaungisumech v.recip. (males) related as brothers-in-law
w Ngiual n. village in E. Babeldaob;
r A rechad er a Ngiual a euid el omengur er a ta el sils. --The inhabitants of Ngiual eat constantly (lit. seven times) throughout the day. 
v meluked v.t. xx; 
- ngkedall v.a.s. (fine) is to be paid
- ngluked v.r.s. (fine) paid 
w Ngkeklau n. hamlet in Ngerard
w Ngkesol n. reef in Ngcheangel
w Ngkud n. area on border of Melekeok and Ngiual
v melukl v.t. xx;
- ngkuul v.a.s. is to be transported or moved
- nglukl v.r.s. 
w melabek v.t. xx;
- nglabek v.r.s. ironed; planed;
- nglebengabek v.r.s.redup. (skin) scraped all over
w merader v.t. xx;
- nglader v.r.s. sent or seen off; returned; sent back; (bride) brought to prospective husband family
w melai v.t. xx; 
- nglai v.r.s. brought; taken; received; obtained
w melaml v.t. xx;
- nglaml v.r.s. (grass, garden, yard etc.) cut
w nglangl n. disintegrating wood; termite excrement
w nglaos n. foundation of house (including supports);
nglosel n.poss.3sg.
w melamech v.t. xx;
- nglemachel v.r.s. in a state of having chewed betel;
- bekenglemachel, sekenglemachel v.s. prone to chewing (betelnut) or smoking (tobacco) excessively
w nglemokel n. xx; 
nglemekelel n.poss.3sg. 
v meletem v.t. xx;
- ngletem v.r.s. licked
w olidel n. any instrument for lifting smth out of water
v melidel v.t. lift (food, fishtrap, etc.) out of water;
ngidelii ngmidel ngildelii ngilidel 
- nglidel v.r.s. lifted out of water
- ngidall v.a.s. is to be lifted out of water 
w nglikliabed, ngliskiabed  n. roof area at both ends of bai or house above tuangel 
v melim v.t. xx;
- nglim v.r.s. (beverage) drunk
v melimet v.t. xx;
- nglimet v.r.s. bailed
v onging v.i. xx; v.t. lead (group); bring (friend, company etc.) home; invite 
v melodech v.t. xx;
- nglodech v.r.s. changed
- ngedechang v.s.inch. has begun to change; 
- ngeldengodech v.r.s.redup. various; miscellaneous;
- kak(e)ngodech, kengodech v.recip. different (from each other);
- mengedengodech v.s.redup. changeable;
p ngodech er a rengul --find smth strange, different or suspicious;
e Ng ngodech er a renguk a omerellel a Droteo. --I find Droteo's actions suspicious or strange. 
v meloik v.t. xx;
- ngloik n.r.s. dance
nglikel n.poss.3sg.
p nglikel a Toki --Toki's way of dancing;
p blil a ngloik --dance hall
w nglosech n. section of thatched roof of bai; 
ngelsechel n.poss.3sg.
p nglosech er a umad --section of thatching at both ends of roof;
p nglosech er a chelid --section of thatching at center of rood;
p melai nglosech --section of thatching between ends and center of roof;
p nglosech er a bedebadel, nglosech er a olikchelid --subdivisions of melai nglosech
v melubet v.t. xx;
- nglubet v.r.s. (clothes etc.) taken off; pulled out; freed; absolved
v melukl v.t. xx;
- nglukl v.r.s. hit; smashed into or against 
w nglumel v.s. waterlogged
v meluluuch v.t. pray to; plead to; implore; apologize to;
ngunguchii ngilunguchii
- nglunguuch v.r.s. prayed to; n.r.s. prayer;
- ngunguchall v.a.s. is to be prayed to 
- kangunguuch v.recip. apologize to each other 
nglunguchel n.poss.3sg. 
w ngmak n. plant in daisy family (Ageratum conyzoides)
w ngmanged v.i. slip or slide down (and fall); get seduced or titillated by; become infatuated with
v olenganged v.caus. lower by sliding
w ngmanget v.i. fall behind; lose race etc.
v ngmasech v.t. xx; v.i. (sun) rise; (ship) get stuck or wrecked (on reef, etc.); (ship) run aground (on reef, etc.)
w ngmatel n.a.s. water to be bailed out;
ngmetelel n.poss.3sg.
p ngmetelel a chull --rainwater which needs to be bailed out
w mengelengelt v.s.redup. (ground) soft or easy to sink in; v.i.redup. keep sinking
w ngmill v.i. fall down
w ngmui n. tree in Icacina family (Urandra ammui) 
w ngoaol n. xx;
p ngikel el ngoaol --deep sea fish;
p ngoaol a rengul --confronted with and perplexed by large task or responsibility
w ngobeet v.i. submerge into water; (wick of lamp) burn away; (lamp) go down; (neck, eye, cheek, etc.) get pulled or drawn in; 
- ngobetang v.i.inch. is beginning to submerge; (lamp) is beginning to go down;
- ngobetung v.i.pred. is about to submerge; (lamp) is about to go down
v olengebeet v.caus. push smth under water; turn down (wick of lamp); make (oneself) cringe or slink
ongebetii ongebeet ulengebetii ulengebeet
- ulngebeet v.r.s. pushed under water; (wick of lamp) turned down
- ongebetall v.a.s. is to be pushed under water; (wick of lamp) is to be turned down
w ngobt n. membrane (or sticky substance) on newborn baby; 
ngebtel n.poss.3sg. 
p ngebtel a kerrekar --resin of tree;
p ngebtel a katatsumuri --sticky fluid of snail;
v melobt v.t. wash membrane off (newborn baby);
ngobtii ngilebtii 
- ngebtall v.a.s. 
- nglobt v.r.s. (newborn baby) has had membrane washed off;
- kengobt v.recip. (newborn animals) lick each other
w ongoll v.i. clear throat (to give warning of one's presence)
w ngolm n. glochidion tree (Glochidion sp.)
- kesengolm n. tree similar to ngolm
w ngomek v.i. disappear 
w ngor n. xx; bill (of bird); beak;
p ngerel a bilas --sound of a boat; 
p ngerel a charm --animal sound(s);
p ngerel a ongurs --chant sung while doing hard work; 
p ngerel a omeius --chant sung while paddling; 
p klou a ngerel --talk too loud;
p kekere a ngerel --talk too softly;
p melaok a ngerel --good at speaking; eloquent;
p oldirekerek er a ngor --talk or laugh too loud
w omsoeche(l)ngor n. jaw
v olengeriakl v.caus. move smth or oneself forward;
ongereklii ongeriakl ulengereklii ulengeriakl
- ulengeriakl v.r.s. moved forward
w ngosechekl v.i. xx;
- kaungesechekl v.recip. praise each other
w ngot n. mortar; receptacle for pounding or crushing things in
w Ngriil n. hamlet in Ngerechelong
w nguches n. xx; 
p oleau a nguches --get up bright and early; get up early and go to work
w nguemed v.i. xx;
e Ng mla nguemed a kangdalang. --The candle has died out. 
e Ng mla nguemed a cheluchul a olbidel. --The fuel for the lantern has gotten depleted.
w nguibes v.i. xx;
p nguibes a rengul --desirous of; lusting after
w nguis n. xx;
p chural a nguis --snake's tongue; plant in milkweed family;
e A sechelim a ko er a chural a nguis./A sechelim a ko er a nguis el beritengetang a chural. --Your friend speaks with a forked tongue. 
w oubedulnguis v.i. lie prone with head lifted
w nguk n. taro blight (insect)
w nguked n. xx;
ngkedel n.poss.3sg. 
w ngul n. xx; v.s. asthmatic; suffering from a bout of asthma;
nglil n.poss.3sg.; also sound of deep breathing (esp., during sleep)
l kesengliil v.s. ngliil
w ongelengul v.i.redup. sleep soundly (esp., with snoring sound)
w ngurd n. vein; artery;
ngerdel n.poss.3sg. 
p ngurd er a beluu --ridge of land;
p mengurs a ngurd --(person) attractive
w oungerengurd v.i.redup. having protruding of varicose vein

