w lak : xx;
e A lak lebo a Droteo, e ng diak kbong. --If Droteo doesn't go, (then) I won't go.
e Ak medakt a lebo lak ududek el mo er a Merikel. --I'm afraid I won't have any money to go to America.
e Lak molim a biang! --Don't drink beer!
e Lak mongerodech! --Don't make noise!
w lalech n. xx;
- bellachel v.s. xx; (starchy food) too soft or slimy;
- oulalech v.i. (nose) having mucus dripping out
w langel n. xx;
- bekelilangel/bekililangel v.s. xx; 
p lengelel a charm --sound or cry of animal;
p lengelel a ngas --whistling of wind in ironwood tree;
e Ng tuobed a lengelek. --I want to cry. 
v lmangel v.i. xx; howl; v.t. cry over (someone);
longelii lilongelii
- longelang v.i.inch. is starting to cry; 
- longelung v.i.pred. is about to cry;
- medidelangel v.i.redup. cry lightly; 
e A ngalek a lmangel er a demal. --The child is crying for his father. 
v ollangel v.caus. xx; make clanging sound;
olengelii olangel ullengelii ullangel 
w laok n. xx; fatty food (esp., animal fat)
w letkel n.oblig.poss.3sg. xx;
p letkel a Droteo er a mekemad --Droteo's remembrance of the war; 
w Latmikaik n. legendary woman born from a clam who gave birth to first Palauans
w leblebul n.oblig.poss.3sg. xx;
- melebleb v.s. itchy; prickly; covered with fuzz of plant
w Lebuu n. location of cave in Beliliou
w lechet n. xx;
lechetel n.poss.3sg.
p lechetel a bdelul --bandanna; scarf;
p lechetel a chui --hair tie
v melechet v.t. tie; wind or wrap around; bandage; handcuff; tie up (one's) time; keep (person) occupied or busy; 
lochetii lmechet lilechetii lilechet
e Ak milechet er a chimak el telemall. --I'm bandaging up my injured hand.
- lechotel/lechetall v.a.s. is to be tied or wrapped; 
- llechet/llechotel v.r.s. tied; wrapped; kept occupied or busy
w lechul n.oblig.poss.3sg. xx;
p lechul a bodk --scar from operation;
p lechul a delul --scar from burn;
p lechul a delobech --scar from cut
w ulekum/chulekum/lechulekum if (only);
e Ulekum ng ngar er ngii a ududek, me ng mo sebechek el mo er a Merikel. --If only I had some money, then I'd be able to go to America.
e Ulekum ak kau, e ak mo er a Siabal. --If only I were you, then I'd go to Japan. 
meledes v.t. xx; stretch (oneself); stretch (arm) to reach for smth; place (long object) lengthwise in relation to smth else; 
- ledokel/ledesall v.a.s. is to be stretched out or placed lengthwise; 
- lledes/lledokl v.r.s. stretched; placed lengthwise; 
- kledes v.s. sitting with legs outstretched
w lei n. coconut (fruit) (usually, when split in half)
w lemlak xx;
e A lemlak a ududel a Droteo, e ng dimlak lebo er a Guam. --If Droteo hadn't had the money, (then) he wouldn't have gone to Guam.
w lemelemel n.oblig.poss.3sg. xx;
p lemelemel a blai --length of house
v melemolem v.t. xx;
- lemelemall v.a.s. (long object) is to be laid down lengthwise; (work, schooling, etc.) is to be completed; is to be accomplished; (path, stream, etc.) is to be followed;
- llemolem v.r.s.(long object) laid down lengthwise; (work, schooling, etc.) completed; accomplished; (path, stream, etc.) followed; parallel;
v meleng v.t. xx;
- lengiil v.a.s. is to be borrowed;
p lengiil a blai --house for rent; hotel
w lenguul n.a.s. penis;
lengulel n.a.s.poss.3sg.
w lkel n.oblig.poss.3sg. xx;
p lkel a olekang --leaves put in bottom of pot so contents will not stick during cooking;
p lkel a sualo --leaves, paper, etc. put in bottom of basket so that contents will not get dirty or fall through openings
v melik v.t. xx;
- lkiil v.a.s. (bottom of pot, basket) is to be lined with leaves;
- llik v.r.s (bottom of pot, basket) lined with leaves
w llach n. xx; rule; instruction;
llechul n.poss.3sg. 
p chad er a llach --lawyer;
p oltirakl er a llach --follow, obey or uphold law; 
p oleiit er a llach --break or disobey law; 
p melechang/omsa a llecul a rengul --teach (someone) a lesson;
e Ng di ngai a llechul er a rael. --He'll learn from hard experience (since he won't listen to his family's advice, etc.)
mellach v.t. xx;
lochur lilechur
- lechuul v.a.s. is to be advised or warned; 
- llechuul v.r.s. advised; warned 
- kellach v.recip. advise or warn each other 
v melechang v.t. xx;
- llechang v.r.s. put; taken;
e A Toki a lilia a komibako er a eungel a tebel. --Toki put the wastebasket under the table. 
w llecheluches v.r.s.redup. scribbled or written all over
v meloched v.t. xx;
- llechidel v.r.s. (string, cord, wire, etc.) broken;
p meloched a berius/daob --strong current develops 
v melecholech v.t. xx;
- llecholech v.r.s sawed
w llechukl n. xx;
p llechukl el tekoi --written language;
p ungil el llechukl --well-written;
e Mnguu a llecheklek. --Take my picture. 
w oullel (a tuu) v.i. do a half-hearted job; not be very interested in or committed to; not expand any effort or energy on (lit., possess banana leaves which are elastic and flexible
w llel n.oblig.poss.3sg. xx;
p llel a kerrekar --leaves of the tree;
p llel a lius --coconut leaves; 
p llel a babier --piece or sheet of paper;
p llel a hong --page of a book;
e Ke di tmak er a llel a omerael. --Why are you just inviting yourself to go along. 
v meling v.t. xx;
- lling v.r.s. punched with a hole
w llomes n. xx;
p llemesel a rum --brightness of the room;
p llemesel a btelum/rengum --your intelligence; 
p llomes me a klebesei --day and night 
omekllomes v.caus. xx;
mekllemesii mekllomes milkllemesii milkllomes
- ulekllomes v.r.s. brightened; enlightened; 
- ukllemesall v.a.s. is to be brightened or enlightened
w ukllemesel n.oblig.poss.3sg. enlightenment 
v melud v.t. xx;
- llud v.r.s fucked
w llut n. xx;
lletul/lletengel n.poss.3sg.
w lmuk v.i. xx;
- lukong v.i.inch. become silent;
- cheklmuk v.s. (person) quiet, silent or taciturn
w lmuut v.i. xx;
- luuetang v.i.inch. is beginning to return or do again; 
- luuetung v.i.pred. is about to return or do again; 
p el mo lmuut er a --going all the way to;
p lmuut el --even more;
p me a lmuut --also; in addition 
e Ak liluut el menguiu er a hong. --I reread the book./I read the book again.
e Ak mlo smecher er a sasimi, e ng di a Droteo a liluut el kmal mlo smecher. --I got sick from the sashimi, but Droteo got even sicker. 
w meleluluut/meluluut v.i.redup xx;
w lok [eng. lock] n. lock
v mengkar v.t. xx;
e Ng beot a longkar er tia el beluu. --Guarding this village is easy.
w lot n. tapeworm; v.s. having a tapeworm
v melatk v.t. xx;
- lotkang v.t.inch. begin to remember
w lsal mod. (not) very
w luchel n.oblig.poss.3sg. goose pimples
w luiil n. dead coral; old name for hamlet in Beliliou;
- Obakraluiil n. name of elder from Luiil
w luk n. silence
w lukes n. area of ocean of moderate depth (in Palauan legend, place of origin of clam that eventually gave rise to Palauan people)
w lung n. xx;
- lungeribtall n. = lung;
e Kau, ke lung? --Why are you so quiet?
v omeklusech v.t. xx;
meklsechii meklusech mileklsechii mileklusech
- uklsechall v.a.s. is to be wished luck; 
- uleklusech v.r.s. wished luck
w luut n. xx;
ltel/lutel n.poss.3sg.
p luut a rengul --anything causing one to lose one's resolve;
e Ng diak a luut rengul a Droteo. --Nothing makes Droteo give up what he's doing. 
v olluut v.t. xx; refund (money)

