p ngebekel a bail --ironing of clothes
p ngebekel a kerreker --planning of lumber
- nglabek, nglebakel v.r.s. (from melabek)
w ngabt v.s. = ngabtchelid
e Ng mle ngabt(chelid), e ak mlo er a uche er a klaidesachel. --Fortuitously, I came in first in the race. 
w ngiul n.oblig.poss. action of taking or obtaining;
p ngiul a udoud --the taking or obtaining of the money
e Ng mle ngiuk. --I was sent for. 
e Ngak a ngit me kau a ngoi? --I just asked for it (and got it), and now you want to take it?
- ngourang v.t.inch. (followed by sg. object) is beginning to get or receive (from melai)
- ngoiong v.t.inch. (followed by pl. object) is beginning to get or receive (from melai)
- ngisel a kim --meat of clam (from ngais)
w derbengais n. oval (shape) 
p ngelekel a rengul, ngelekedchelsel --favorite child
p ngelekel a ngelekel --grandchild
p ngelekel a ulaol = ngalekulaol
p ngelekel a diil --snack, light meal
p ngelekel a diu --small amount of shouting;
p ngelekel a ureor --small or insignificant task 
p ngalek er a oreomel/rael --fatherless child; bastard
p ngalek er a skuul --student; pupil
p ngalek er ngak --my sweetheart
w ngar xx
e A rubak a dirk ngar. --The old man is still alive.
e Ke di ngar er a renguk el mo er a kodall. --I'll remember this (bad deed of yours, etc.) until I die. 
w ngarang xx
- ngara (uchul) me --why? for what reason?
e Te mesuub a ngarang? --What are they studying?
e Ngara ke milecherar er a stoang? --What did you buy at the store?
e A blim ng rruul er a ngarang? --What's your house made out of?
e Ngara el mubi a chobo momes er ngii? --What kind of movie are you going to see?
e Ngara (uchul) me ke mlo er a Saibal? --Why did you go to Saipan?
e Ng diak a ngara el soal, e ng di soal a biang. --He doesn't want anything but or except a beer. 
e Ng diak a ngii di lengarang mekdektak. --There isn't anything that frightens me.
e Ng dimlak a ngara el kulekoi. --I didn't have anything to say.
e A kloklek a klilia er a kmo ng ngarang a di kea kudengei. --I put my things somewhere or into something or other, but I can't remember where. 
w ngark n. xx
- ngerkel n.poss.
w Ngerekei n. last taro patch prepared in Ngerechelong where, according to Palauan legend, a taro scraper was buried
w Ngarkeai n. name given to elders of Imeliik
w ngas n. xx; type of pine tree
w ngesachel xx; n. upward slope; ascent
w ngetechel n.oblig.poss.3sg. (action of) cleaning
- ngetechel a mlai --(action of) cleaning a car or canoe
v melatech v.t. xx
- nglatech, ngeltachel v.r.s.
- ngetachel, ngetechall v.a.s. 
- kengatech v.recip. wash (something) together or in group 
w ulletachel n. dirt that has been scrubbed away
w Ngcheangel n. 
