w e conn. xx;
e Te meruul er a kall e merael. --They make the food and then (they) leave.
e Ak dilsechii a mlai e chilsberberii. --I carved the canoe and then painted it.
e A lengar er ngii a ududek, e ak mo er a Guam. --If I had money, (then) I'd go to Guam. 
e Se er a kbo er a Merikel, e ak kilie er a blil a Toki. --When I went to America, I lived at Toki's place. 
e A klukuk e te me er a blik. --Tomorrow they're coming to my house. 
e Ak milluches a babier e a sechelik a mirruul a kall. --I was writing letters and or while my friend was preparing food. 
e Ngara me ke di dechor e omengur? --Why are you standing up while eating?
e A Droteo a metongakl, e a Toki a kekedeb. --Droteo is tall, but Toki is short.
w e vocative. word (used with name when addressing someone)
w eabed n. xx;
p merael el eabed --low, fast-moving clouds;
p ulat el eabed --high, stationary clouds
w eai num. xx;
p eai el buil --eight months
w eanged n. xx;
engedel n.poss.3sg. (eye)brow
- chelleanged n. location in sky relatively close to earth;
- Uchelianged n. legendary Palauan creator;
p engedel a mad --eyebrow;
p beluu er a eanged --heaven;
p rubak er a eanged --god;
e Ng ungil a eanged. --Weather is good./(Someone) is in good mood.
e Ng mekngit a eanged. --Weather is bad.
w ears n. xx;
p mechut el ears --early immigrants to a village; 
p beches el ears --recent immigrants to a village
w ouears v.t. use (particular material) as sail
w kliars n.r.s triangle
w ebangkelio [from Spain] n. gospel
v melebed v.t. xx;
- ebedall v.a.s. is to be lassoed or ensnared
- ilebed v.r.s. lassoed; ensnared
w Echeluu n. mangrove channel in Ngerard
v meluchet v.t. xx;
- echetall v.a.s. is to be unhooked;
- iluchet v.r.s. unhooked
w ekong v.i. xx;
- echikang v.i.inch. is beginning to go (towards hearer)
w -ed poss.suffix.1st pers.pl.incl. our (including you)
w Edeaur n. old name of Ngeaur
w edechedong n. three stripped-off pieces
w edechid n. breadth of tree fingers
w edei num. three;
p ede el klebesei --three nights
w okedei num. thirty
w ongedei num. third;
p ongede el ureor --Wednesday;
p ongede el buil --March;
p ongede el skuul --third grade; third grader 
w ouedeiskors v.i. have three wives
w edeitiud n. (one) third;
p ta/chimo er a edeitiud --one third;
p eru er a edeitiud --two thirds
w edeuong num. three (long objects)
w oumead v.t. boast about (oneself)
w mead v.s. conceited; proud of oneself; boastful;
- medengang v.s.inch. is getting too conceited or proud; is getting a swelled head 
melad v.t. xx;
edengii edengelterir ildengii ildengelterir 
- edongel v.a.s. xx
- ilad v.r.s. coaxed into doing smth; flattered; whetted; sharpened;
- meldelad v.t.redup. keep needling or coaxing (someone); keep flattering
w ilad n.r.s pride;
ildengel n.r.s.poss.3sg. 
w -ei suffix used in terms of address. See chedei, ngelekei, merrengei, ochellei
w eimuong num. five (long objects)
w -ek poss.suffix 1st pers.sg. my
w ekebil n. girl
w ekil n. thick braided rope;
e Te menga a ekil. --They're from Angaur. (lit. They it rope used to tie slaves and therefore a symbol of inferiority)
w ekong v.i. xx;
e Ng sebechek el eko er a blim er a klukuk. --I can come to your house tomorrow.
e Bo er a bita e a Droteo a ikong. --Go next door, and Droteo will be along (soon). 
w le xx;
e Ng dimlak kbo er a party e le a bechik a mle smecher. --I didn't go to the party because my wife was sick. 
w elechang n. xx;
p er a elecha el taem --these days;
p er a elecha el tutau --this morning; 
p elecha el sils --today;
p elecha el mong --from now on
w elii n. xx;
p er a tutau er a elii --yesterday morning
w elolem num. xx;
p elolem el rak --six years
w -em poss.suffix 2nd pers.sg. your
w -emam poss.suffix, 1st pers.pl.excl. our (excluding your)
w -emam pro.obj.1st pers.pl.excl. us (excluding you)
w emel n.oblig.poss.3sg. interior; rear of enclosed space; interior end of mangrove channel;
p melai a ngar er a emel el tekoi --try to find smth out indirectly; try to find out what is really behind the situation; 
p el mo er a emel --in the direction of land
w -emiu poss.suffix 2nd pers.pl. you
w -emiu pro.obj.2nd pers.pl. you
w emull n. xx;
emellel n.poss.3sg.
w e ng di xx;
e A Toki a mle soal el mo er a Guam, e ng di ng mla mo diak a ududel. --Toki wanted to go to Guam, but her money ran out.
e Ak ileko er a blim e ng di ke mle dibus. --I came to your house, but you were out. 
v engelakl v.t. xx;
engeleklii ilengeleklii
p me engelakl --come by;
p mo engelakl --go by
w melengelakl v.i. keep passing out or going back and forth
w eolt n. xx; storm; typhoon;
p eltel a ngebard --west wind;
e A eolt a bad er a cheskiik. --The wind is sleeping in the cheskiik tree (i.e. - it's time when the east wind is strong during the day and quiet at night).
e Ng ungil a eltel. --He's in a very good mood (esp., after drinking). 
w meleolt (a rengul) v.s. (person) carefree or nonchalant; (person) not easily disturbed or content to let things happen as they may 
w eong n. white foam residue which forms when coconut syrup is cooked
w eou n. xx;
p eungel a tebel --space under(neath) the table;
p eungek --space below or underneath me;
p ngar er a eou a rengul --humble; respectful;
e A Droteo a kie er a eou. --Droteo live downstairs.
e A Tony a ngar er a eou el chad. --Tony is lower in rank.
e A katuu a mechiuaiu er a eungek. --The cat is sleeping underneath me (i.e. under my chair). 
e A bilas a ulekiu a eungel a did. --The boat passed under the bridge.
e Bo er a eou! --Sit down!/Wait!
w er a uche er a before;
p er a uche er a cheldecheduch --before the meeting;
e A ulemuchel el mesuub er a uche er a kumengur. --I began to study befor (I had) dinner.
w er a uriul er a after;
p er a uriul er a cheldecheduch --after the meeting;
e Ak mlo mechiuaiu er a uriul er a lorael a Toki. --I went to sleep after Toki left. 
w eresaod n. two separate pieces (of long object)
w eresuk n. two quantities or portions
w eretelooch n. two pieces of pre-chewed food
w eretiud n. two cut pieces (of food)
w -erir poss.suffix 3rdpers.human.pl. their
w er se er a when (in the past);
p er se er a Sebadong --last Saturday;
p er se er a taem er a Siabal --during the Japanese times;
p er se er a (taem er a) mekemad --during the war; 
e Ak milsuub er se er a leme a Droteo. --I was studying when Droteo came. 
e A Satsko a chiliis er se er a lesa a deleb. --Satsko fled when she saw the ghost. 
w Ersoi n. legendary male inhabitant of Ngeriab
w melasem v.t. xx;
- esemall/esomel v.a.s. is to be tried out or challenged;
- ilasem v.r.s. tried out; challenged
w Esou n. name of elder from Imeliik who (in Palauan legeng) bought a large bai built by Orachel and became high chief of Imeliik
w etiu num. xx;
p etiu el rak --nine years
w euachedong n. four stripped-off pieces
w euaitiud n. (one) fourth;
p ta/chimo er a euaitiud --one fourth;
p ede er a euaitiud --three fourths
w euaiuong num. four (long objects)
w okouang num. forty
w euang num. xx;
p eua el buil --four months
w Euchel n. location in Ngeriab where, in Palauan legend, Adebetei and Ersoi went to carouse with fish-maidens; shallow area in ocean between Beliliou and Ngeaur.
w euid num. xx;
p euid el klok --seven o'clock
w fenda [from Eng.] n. fender
w Furans [from Eng.] n. France
w hang interj. Oh! (exclamation of surprise)
w hang n. xx; section of village or town
w harau v.t. xx;
e A sensei a mle harau a blals. --The teacher paid the fine.
w Hereng n. Helen reef (southwest of Koror)
w hngob/hngobe interj. exclamation uttered to draw attention to unpleasant smell
w hngong interj. exclamation uttered to draw attention to unpleasant smell
w H.O. n. (abbrev.) Babeldaob (used pejoratively); v.s. unexperienced in Western ways; ignorant of modern conveniences;
p chad er H.O. --country rube (used pejoratively with reference to inhabitants of Babeldaob)
w honto n. xx;
p chad er a honto --inhabitant of Babeldaob;
e Ak mo er a honto. --I'm going to Babeldaob.
w rechihuribing/rechihuiribing n.pl. inhabitants of the Philippines
w huuhuu n. sound of dog barking; bow-wow
w ouhuu v.i. (dog) bark
w iab n. gold-spotted jack
w iakorang n. tuberose; asucena
w iami n. grass in snapdragon family
w ias n. milky mangrove tree; river poison tree
w iau n. nakedness
w Ibangellel n. location in Imeliik
w Ibedul n. title of chiefs in Koror
w Ibeluu n. name of clan in Ngchesar
w Ibesang n. location in Ollei
w ibokill n. curve (in road)
w ibuchel n. sea urchin; anus; asshole;
ibechelel n.poss.3sg. 
p ungelel a ibuchel --hard membrane inside sea urchin;
p ibuchel er a ngemai --sea urchins found in great quantity in shallow; fortunate person who without any effort on his part gets showered with gifts or girlfriends
w -id poss.suffix 1st pers.pl.incl. our (including your)
w -id pro.obj. 1st pers.pl.incl. us (including you)
w ideliseb n. xx;
p er a idelsebel --three days ago;
p er a uche er a idelsebel --four or more days ago
w idenges n. Palauan money: type of kldait
v melides v.t. pare or shred (fruit);
idesii imides ildesii ilides 
- idesall v.a.s. (fruit) is to be pared or shredded;
- ildesall/ilides v.r.s. (fruit) pared or shredded 
w ideuekl v.i. go around (corner of building); to hide or conceal oneself
w idokel v.s. dirty; filthy; n. dirtiness; filthiness; 
idekelel n.poss.3sg. 
p idekelel a bilem --the filthiness of your clothes
v omekidokel v.caus. (person) get (someone's clothes, body, etc.) dirty;
mekidekelii mekidokel milkedeli milkidokel 
w bekidokel v.s. easily soiled
w mesidokel v.s. somewhat dirty; somewhat faded in color
w idungel n. firewood;
idengelel n.poss.3sg.
w Iebukel n. hamlet in Koror
w Iebukel n. hamlet in Ngerechelong
w Iechad n. legendary inhabitant of Ngriil who lent Palauan money to Remesechau
w iedel n. xx;
edelel n.poss.3sg.
- mesedel/mesiedel n. hog plum (type of mango)
w Iesus [from Germ.] Jesus (protestant usage)
w ieteklel n.oblig.poss.3sg. what one should do with smth; how one should deal with smth; (someone's) way of doing or using smth;
e Ng di kea kudenge a ieteklek er aika el kall. --I don't know what to do with all that food.
w iidek n. xx;
p idekel a but --buttocks
w iikl n. syn. iikr
w iikr n. xx;
p ikrel a blai --outside of the house;
p el mo er a ikrel --in the direction beyond the reef;
e A rengalek a milil er a iikr. --The children are playing outside.
w iings [from Eng.] n. hinge
w iis n. xx; curved board at entrance of bai laid on top of kuoku or chututem; 
p blsebselel a iis --nostril;
p medal a iis  - --tip of nose;
p medulel a iis --bridge of nose; 
p bita a isngel --having only one nostril;
p obuu a osul a iis --get nosebleed;
r A isnged a di kmeed e diak dengetemii. --Our nose is close (to the mouth), but cannot be licked. --i.e. we shouldn't be too sure or overconfident to ourselves.
w -ik poss.suffix 1st pers.sg. my
w ikesoul n. Palauan money: type of kldait
w iksid n. Palauan money: type of kldait
w ikurs n. twitching (nervous disorder)
w -il poss.suffix 3rd pers.sg. his; her; its; poss.suffix 3rd pers.non-human.pl. their
w ilalidel v.s. having chills; shivering severely
w ilaot n. xx; nectar; any sweet liquid; 
ilotel n.poss.3sg. 
p ilotel a chilakngil --honey
w ilbolb n. fortress
w melbolb v.t. encircle; encompass
v melild v.t. peel or remove skin of (fruit, tapioca, taro, etc.);
ildii imild ilildii ilild
- ildall v.a.s. (fruit, tapioca, taro, etc.) is to be peeled; 
- ilild v.r.s. (fruit, tapioca, taro, etc.) peeled
w ildois n. xx;
p diak lua ildisel a --very many; not like any quantity of smth imaginable;
e A ildisel! --That's too much!
e Ng tela a ildisel a lisem? --How many coconuts do you have?
v meleakl v.t. xx;
- ileakl v.r.s. separated; separate; set apart; removed; dissociated; special 
v meleleb v.t. xx;
elebii iueleb illebii illeleb 
- ileleb v.r.s xx; flooded; under water; covered (with blanket, etc.)
v meliuch v.t. open (can); cut open (coconut); break ground for (taro patch); work over soil in preparing (taro patch);
iuchii imiuch iluchii iliuch
- iliuch/iluochel v.r.s. opened; cut open;
- iuochel v.a.s. is to be opened or cut open 
w iliud n. syn. iluodel
v meliuekl v.t. xx;
iuklii iuekl iliueklii iliuekl 
- iliuekl v.r.s. surrounded by; 
- iuekill v.a.s. is to be surrounded by;
- meleliuekl v.i.redup. keep turning around or revolving 
w ilkaik n. curved edge of bottom of canoe which remains above water
w melkaik v.t. even out or shape curves on bottom of (canoe) 
w ilkolk n. darkness; stupidity;
ilkelkel n.poss.3sg. 
p ilkelkel a rum --darkness or gloominess of the room; 
p ilkelkel a btelum/rengum --your stupidity; 
w ilkol n. mosquito (term used only in Peleliu)
w illitokl n. whirlwind
w ilmokl n.r.s. freedom; license; permission;
ilmeklel n.poss.3sg.
e Ak milsa a ilmokl a Droteo, me ng sebechel el mo er a katsudo. --I've given Droteo freedom (from earlier restrictions), so he can go to the movies. 
w ilobech n. hollowed-out hull of canoe or boat; hold;
ilebechel
w ilou n. sheltered or protected area next to hill, mountain, etc.
v mesechem v.t. xx;
isechemii isechem ilsechemii ilsechem
- ilsechem v.r.s. held or grasped firmly;
- isechemall v.a.s. is to be held or grasped firmly 
w ilteet n. xx;
p ngalek ilteet --child of high family
v meluil v.t. xx; v.i. (waves) roll;
- iluil v.r.s rolled up
w ilumel n.a.s. xx; beverage;
p imelek el ralm --my drink of water;
p imelem el kohi --your drink or cup of coffee;
p ilumel er a party --party drink
w Iluochel n.r.s. (in Palauan legend) name of Dilidechuu in Ngeaur after she began to prepare taro patches
v meius v.t. xx;
- ilus v.r.s. rowed; paddled; stirred;
- isall v.a.s. is to be rowed, paddled or stirred
w -im poss.suffix. 2nd pers.sg. your
w Imeiong n. hamlet in Ngeremlengui
w mimokl v.s. xx;
p mimokl a rengul --broad-minded;
p mimokl a usekerel el chad --person who is easy to coax or flatter; person who is flexible or generous 
v melimokl v.t. xx;
imeklii imokl ilemeklii ilemokl 
- ilmokl v.r.s loosened;
- imekill v.a.s. is to be loosened
w Imeliik n. village in S.W. Babeldaob; 
- rechimeliik n.pl. inhabitants of Imeliik
w imiit v.i. xx;
p imiit a medal --asleep;
p diak liit --without fail; definitely;
e Ng diak liit el me a Droteo. --Droteo will definitely come.
e Ng diak kiit el mekodkau. --I won't fail to kill you (one of these days). 
e Ng mla imiit a cheokl. --The worst is over. 
e A Toki a mla imiit. --Toki has given birth.
e A ngalek a ietu a medal. --The child is about to fall asleep. 
w imiu v.t. pass by or in front of
w Imiungs n. old name of Ngeremlengui
w imorech v.s. too much; overflowing
w Imul n. hamlet in Imeliik
w imuul v.i. cross over (to other side); n. crossbeam of bai on whose projecting ends  buikorengodel is laid; crossbeam of house on whose projecting ends orengodel is laid
w Ingas n. name of house in Ngerubesang
w Ingdonesia n. Indonesia
w ingukl n. stones on which cooking pot is placed; hearth; fire pit
w iobech n. ravine; valley
w meliobech v.t. chop or chip (canoe) out of log 
w iodes n. Palauan money: type of kldait
w ioi interj. Oh! (exclamation of surprise used by females)
w iorech n. high incoming tide resulting from strong current
w oleorech n. overflow; overabundance
w ioud n. xx;
e Tia el eudem! --What happened? - You're late!
w -ir poss.suffix 3rd pers.human.pl. their
w -ir pro.obj. 3rd pers.sg. him; her; it
w irebereb n. darkness; 
- mengirebereb v.i. walk or grope in the dark 
v omekioud/omekmeoud v.caus. make late; delay;
mekioudii mekioud milekioudii milekioud
- ulekioud v.r.s. delayed 
w irechar n. xx;
p rechedad er a irechar --our ancestors
w ititiumd n. ancient times; former times; a long time ago
w itotech n. thumb-print emperor fish
w -iu poss.suffix 2nd pers.pl. your
w iuaiu v.s. calm; peaceful
w mechiuaiu v.s./i. xx;
p mo mechiuaiu --go to sleep;
p Kemiu a ko er a mechiuaiu. --You're not paying any attention (i.e. it's as if you were sleeping). 
omechiuaiu v.caus. xx;
mechiuii mechiueterir milechiuii milechiueterir
- ochiuall v.a.s. is to be put to sleep
w mechiuaiu n. sensitive plant (contracts when touched)
w iud n. bunch of bananas
w iud n. type of clam
w iudoraibu [from Eng. U-drive] n. rent-a-car; U-drive car; v.s. (woman) loose or fast
w iuechel (a mad) n.oblig.poss.3sg. tears
w Iuekako n. passage in Ngerdmau
w Iuesang n. location in Ngeriab
w iul n. freycinetia tree
w Iuliti n. Ulithi
w iull n. wave in open ocean; swell;
- ouiull v.i. (fish) swim near surface of water and make ripples; (submerged log, etc.) cause surface of water to ripple
w iumd n. algae
w iungs n. xx;
ingsel n.poss.3sg.
- rechiungs n.pl. islanders;
p ingsel a Belau --islands of Palau;
p chad er a iungs --islander (way of referring to inhabitants of other Micronesian districts)
w meliungs v.t. chop (log) into pieces
w ius n. xx;
p ius er a Belau --Palauan crocodile (without webbed feet);
p ius er a chomote --non-indigenous crocodile (with webbed feet)
w iusech n. xx;
isechel n.poss.3sg.
w omekiusech v.caus. calm surface of (ocean) by spitting coconut juice on it; wait for (sea) to become calm 
w iuud n. type of oyster 
