w rabek n. spy;
- ourabek v.i. spy out (in advance)
w rachel n. xx; bough; branch of government
w urrechomel n.r.s. curved Palauan money of various mixed colors (type of bachel less valuable than berrak);
p urrechomel a rengul --indecisive
w rael n. xx; path; canal; means; solution; ...
p ng diak a rolel e --there's no way to/have no way to;
p rolel a ralm --ditch;
p chad er a rael --outsiders;
p tekoi er a rael --non-private matters; public knowledge; 
p ngalek er a rael --fatherless child; bastard; 
e Ng di kea a rolel e lluut. --There's no longer any way for him to return.
e Ng diak a rolek e kbo er a Merikel. --I don't have any way of going to America. 
v merael v.t. xx;
- reall v.a.s. (particular distance) is to be walked, traveled or covered 
w oreall n. horizontal pole at sides of canoe or raft used to assist in footing or in beaching of canoe; n.r.s. highest part of reef which can be walked on at low tide
w ourael v.t. use (particular path, route, etc.) as road
w sekerael v.s. travel a lot; go from place to place; can't settle down 
w urrolel n.oblig.poss. track; imprint
w ouraelkeobel v.i. (inside of betel nut) have depression in it 
w raelorengodel n. syn. semosem
w railchoi n. syn. kirrai 
w ourais v.i. have roots; take root 
w rak n. xx;
p er tia el me el rak --next year; 
p er se el me el rak --the year after next;
p er tia el mlo merek el rak --last year;
p er se el mlo merek el rak --the year before last; 
e Ng tela a rekim? --How old are you?
w rakket n. xx;
p rakket er a tenis --tennis racquet
w rakt n. xx;
- merakt v.s. xx; having labor pains; 
p rektel a redil --menstruation;
p rektir a rechad er a Doisu --German measles; 
p rektel a chesebreng --broken-heartedness;
p olab rektel --pregnant 
v omralm v.caus. xx;
mrelmii mralm mirrelmii mirralm 
- urelmall v.a.s. xx;
- urralm v.r.s. (clothes) rinsed 
w ralmetaoch n. xx;
p ralmetaoch a rengul --insensitive; not easily affected; easygoing; casual; prone to avoiding responsibility 
v omekramek v.caus. put compost on (garden, taro patch, etc.);
mekremkii mekramek milekremkii milekramek
- ulekramek v.r.s. treated with compost 
w rames n. (long, high-piched) fart;
remesel n.poss.3sg.
- meremerames v.i.redup. fart continually
w rami n. ramie plant
w rami n. xx;
- ourami v.i. play rummy
w ranningngu n. xx; sleeveles T-shirt
w raod n. aerial root of tebechel, mangrove tree;
p menguchet a raod --be homosexual
w rasechebeab (el chad) v.s. cruel; heartless; ungrateful
w rasech n. xx;
e Ng di rasech a bilel. --His clothes are covered with blood.
w rasm n. xx;
p rasm er a chim --needle for hand-sewing;
p rasm er a mesil --needle for machine-sewing;
e Ng diak rriid a resmel. --She's very thorough./She doesn't miss anything.
v merasm v.t. xx;
- rresimel v.r.s. ; 
- rsimel v.a.s. is to be sewn 
w rsimel n.a.s. smth to be sewn;
resmelel n.poss.3sg. 
w rresimel n.r.s. smth sewn;
rresmelel n.poss.3sg. 
w rtul n.oblig.poss.3sg. dry or withered state (of tree);
- merat v.s. (tree) dry or withered;
- merterat v.s.redup. xx; 
- ratureomel n. tree which has withered or died naturally;
p merat a rengul --deeply disappointed or hurt 
v merat (a rengul) v.t. hurt someone's feelings;
rotir rirtir
w omekrat v.caus. chop tree and wait for it to wither
w raud n. closing; last month of Palauan year (when winds are variable);
p raud a rengul --variable; indecisive
v meraud v.t. close (fishnet); v.i. season (be changing);
rodii remaud rirudii riraud
- rraud v.r.s. (fishet) closed
v merad v.t. pick (flowers, medicinal plants, young leaves at tip of vine); pick or gather sticks, vines, etc. (for fishtrap); pick small taro leaves for demok;
rodir remad rirdir rirad
- rdall/rdiil v.a.s. (flowers, etc.) are to be picked;
- rrad/rredall v.r.s xx
w urrediil n. remaining stalk (after flower or leaves have been removed)
w Rdechor n. title of chiefs in Ngcheangel
w re-/r- pl.suffix. used only with nouns referring to human beings: rechad, resensei, rekebil
w reakl n. bamboo poles laid on imuul beams of house (used for storage)
w rebai n. xx; area or space in back (of a building);
- ourebai v.i. walk by the rear of house; defecate (in bushes, etc., in back of house); 
p rebai er a blik --in back of my house
v merebek v.t. grope at or test out (with foot, stick, pole, etc.);
robekii ruebek rirebekii rirebek 
v mereberebek v.t.redup. feel around or grope for in the dark; touch (sleeping woman) sexually;
roberebekii roberebek rireberebekii rireberebek 
- reberebekall v.a.s. is to be groped for
w rebetii n. xx;
- ourebetii v.i. sing rebetii
w rebetok n. xx;
p rebetok el chad --many people;
p rebetok el sensei --many teachers
w Ngerebodel n. xx;
e Ng ko er a chades (er a) Rebodel. --He's like the road in Ngerebodel (which doesn't go anywhere in particular) - i.e. he's expanding a lot of effort but not getting anywhere
w reborb v.s./i. xx;
p reborb a daob/dolech --tide stands still;
e Mreborb a kurael. --See you (said to those remaining by person leaving; said to person sitting by person passing by).
w rebotel n. wax apple; sea crab;
p menga a rebotel --make noise or clamor
w reched n. earliness; promptness; haste;
rechedel n.poss.3sg.
e A reched a ioud. --Those who start early may finish late./Haste makes waste.
e Ngara reched? --What's the hurry?
w orreched v.caus. hurry or rush (someone); v.i. be in a hurry;
orechedii orechedeterir urrechedii urrechedeterir 
- orechedall v.a.s. is to be rushed; 
- orechudel v.a.s. is to be rushed; urgent; 
- orrechereched v.i.redup. be in a big hurry 
w rechel n.oblig.poss.3sg. part of smth; genitals
w recherached n. great trevally
v merechorech v.t. xx; capture; kidnap; v.s. selfish
rucherechii ruchorech rirecherechii rirechorech 
- recherechall/recheruchel v.a.s. is to be stolen
w merechorech n. thief;
merecherechel n.poss.3sg.
p merecherechel a bail --inside pocket;
p merecherechel a bdelul --bald spot 
w rechibelau n.pl. Palauans
w rechibeliliou n.pl. inhabitants of Peleliu
w rechibolabe n.pl. inhabitants of Ponape
w rechiil n. cone shell
w rechimeriil n.pl. inhabitants of Meriil
w rechimerikel n.pl. Americans
w rechimiungs n.pl. inhabitants of Miungs
w rechioreor n.pl. inhabitants of Koror
w rechisiabal n.pl. Japanese (people)
w rechull n. type of shellfish
w merecherech v.t.redup. move (oneself) continually; squirm; fidget 
v merech v.t. xx;
rochur remech rirechur rirech 
- rechuul v.a.s. is to be moved, readied or set in order;
- rrech v.r.s. xx;
p merech er a omerael --prepare to leave;
p merech besul --get ready or set (to do smth)
v merodel v.t. xx;
- redall v.a.s. (child) is to be adopted; (pot) is to be lifted from fire
v merodech v.t. xx;
- redechall v.a.s. is to be tried or aimed at blindly;
- rrodech v.r.s. tried or aimed at blindly; tricked into giving information 
v merdekekl v.i. xx; v.t. jump (particular distance);
ridekeklii ridekekl riredekeklii riredekekl 
- bekerdekekl v.s. good at jumping; 
- karedekekl v.recip. xx; 
- redekekill v.a.s. (distance) is to be jumped;
- rredekekl v.r.s. xx
w rekekl n. alarm or alert for war 
v meredem v.t. xx;
rodemii ruedem riredemii riredem 
- redemall/redomel v.a.s. is to have handle put on; is to be installed or attached;
- rredem/rredomel v.r.s. xx;
w rredomel n.r.s someone's work in putting handle on knife, spear, etc. 
rredemelel n.poss.3sg. 
w rekel n.oblig.poss.3sg. rustling sound (of leaves, footsteps, etc.); sound of moving water;
- merereek v.i.redup. make rustling sound continually;
- rereek n. small crab which makes rustling sound 
v orreek v.i. rustle; v.caus. touch lightly;
orekii oreek urrekii urreek 
- oreokel/orekall v.a.s. is to be touched (lightly); 
- urreek v.r.s. touched (lightly) 
w rekau n. main slanting beams of canoe shed whose bottom ends touch ground and top ends meet to form buadel
w reked n. xx;
p Ucherkemul el reked --one of legendary chiefs of Ngeaur
w rekekl n. alarm or alert of war
w rekel n.oblig.poss.3sg. ripe stage (of fruit when fruit is suitable to eat); cooked stage (of food);
- marek v.s. ripe; ready to eat; cooked; be in a half standing position (with legs bent) when dancing;
- merkang v.s.inch. is just becoming ripe or cooked;
e Bo marek! --Bend your legs!/Get down (into a good dancing position)!
v omekmarek v.caus. make or let (plant) ripen; make or let (food) cooked;
mekmerekii mekmarek milekmerekii milekmarek
v merukem v.t. xx;
- rekemall/rekomel v.a.s. is to be broken into pieces or smaller denomination; (money) is to be exchanged;
- rrukem v.r.s. broken into pieces or smaller denomination; (money) exchanged
w Rekemesik n. title of chiefs in Ngetbang
v omereked v.t. xx;
- rekereked/rekereker n. xx; type of sea cucumber that exudes sticky whit substance when touched;
e Kau, ke rekerekered? --Why are you clinging to me all the time?
w rekerukem n. noise (from feet, dropping things, etc.);
rekerekemel n.poss.3sg. 
v merekui v.t. xx;
- rekiaol v.a.s. is to be finished (completely);
- rrekui v.r.s. finished (completely)
v merakl v.t. pick up (ongraol) out of pot;
roklii remakl rireklii rirakl
- rekill v.a.s. is to be picked up out of pot;
- rrakl v.r.s. xx
w orekill n. basket used especially for cooked ongraol 
w Reklai n. title of chiefs in Melekeok
w rekodo n. xx;
p blil a rekodo --record jacket; record cabinet
w rekodoll n. thread; string; 
rekodellel n.poss.3sg.
w rekoi n. struts of bai attached to and projecting from chellabed
w rekos n. degree (of sweetness); benefit;
rekesengel n.poss.3sg.
w rekung n. xx; 
- mengerekung v.i. collect land crabs;
- bekerekung v.s. smell of crabs (after cooking or eating crabs, etc.); 
p rekung el daob --sea crab;
p rekung el beluu --small land crab; 
p rekung el beab --land crab
v meremech v.t. squeeze out; grab and hold; clutch; grasp;
romechii ruemech riremechii riremech 
- beremech v.s. (food, etc.) soft and rotten; 
- remachel/remechall v.a.s. is to be squeezed (out), grasped or clutched;
- rremech v.r.s. squeezed (out); clutched; grasped
w remechakl n. type of fishnet;
- ouremechakl v.i. fish with remechakl
w remekemad n.pl. soldiers; warriors
w ormotel n. large plate used for kneading 
v meremet v.t. knead;
rometii ruemet riremetii riremet 
- remotel v.a.s. is to be kneaded; 
- remeremotel v.a.s.redup. totally weakened by fright
w sumes n. length of pointed bamboo to be stuck into food (for removal from pot, fire, etc.); stick; baton;
smesel n.poss.3sg. 
p oba a sumes --lead band, music or singing
v merumes v.t. xx;
- kerumes v.recip. poke at each other; 
- meremrumes v.t.redup. xx; 
- remesall v.a.s. is to be poked at; (food) is to be tested;
- rrumes v.r.s. poke at; (food) tested 
v merumes v.t. stick; prick; 
sumesii suumes silemesii silumes
- mesumes v.erg. get punctured or punched with a hole;
- selumes v.r.s. stuck; pricked;
- semesall v.a.s. is to be stuck or pricked
w Remesechau n. legendary person who was eaten by a divine snake
w remeteet n.pl. those of high family; the rich;
e A irechar e a remeteet a millabek a blsir a remechebuul. --In earlier times the rich paid the fines of the poor. 
w remiang n. cycade
w remiid v.i. xx; go astray;
- riedang v.i.inch. is just leaving;
- riedung v.i.pred. is just about to leave;
p tia el ririid el sandei --last week;
p se el ririid el sandei --the week before last;
p remiid a bdelul --lose one's mind
w remochel n. grouper
w remorem (a ngerel) v.s. prone to gossiping
v orros v.caus. drown (someone);
orsngii oros ursngii urros
- orsngall v.a.s. is to be drowned; 
- urros v.r.s. drowned 
w remos v.i. drown;
- merseros v.t. xx;
- rosngang v.i.inch. is beginning to drown;
- rosngung v.i.pred. is about to drown
w remouk v.s. afraid of (in fighting); cautious; hesitant; 
- roukang v.s.inch. is becoming afraid of (in fighting)
w orrouk v.caus. threaten; bluff
v meram v.t. xx;
- remuul v.a.s. is to be mixed
w reng n. xx; will; desire; decision;
p blak a rengul --xx; attentive; interested in; intent upon; decided on; in favor of; 
p chelam a rengul --brokenhearted;
p kersos (a rengul) --yearning; anxious (to see);
p kikiongel a rengul --xx; sullen; 
p klikiid a rengul --uninvolved; 
p klou a rengul --patient; confident;
p kngtil a rengul --(someone's) being mean or feeling sad or frustrated
p meched a rengul --thirsty; impatient; prone to overreact; (deprived of and) having strong desire for;
p meduch a rengul --strong-willed; persevering
p mekreos a rengul --xx; selfish
p mekurt a rengul --(someone's) feeling hurt
p melemalt a rengul --good-hearted;
p melemed a rengul --cool down one's anger;
p meleolt a rengul --(person) carefree or nonchalant; (person) not easily disturbed or content to let things happen as they may;
p mengeokl (er a rengul) --burden; bother; cause concern; weigh on;
p olturk er a rengul --xx; get one's fill of; insult continuously or mercilessly; let someone really have it;
p omerteret a rengul --fed up or exasperated with;
e A renguk ke mlo smecher. --I thought (mistakenly) that you were sick.
e A rengul a Droteo ng ko er a kebelu a Toki. --Droteo has the idea that Toki is a little crazy.
e Ng di renguk el mo er a Merikel. --It's my own desire or decision to go to America.
e Me rengum el omengur! --Try to eat more!
v melecherakl v.t. xx;
p telecherakl a rengul --stubborn; obsessed; determined
w tuobed v.i. xx;
p tuobed a rengul --one's real feelings come out 
w ralmetaoch n. xx;
p ralmetaoch a rengul --insensitive; not easily affected; easygoing; casual; prone to avoiding responsibility
w bab n. xx;
p ngar er a bab a rengul --conceited; disrespectful; proud; arrogant; haughty; snobbish
v olengasech v.t. xx;
p olengasech er a rengul --make or get (someone) angry 
w ochemchuml (a rengul) seething inside with anger or hate 
v omdalem v.t. aim (weapon) at; focus (one's words) on particular matter; focus (eyes) straight at;
mdelmii mdalem mildelmii mildalem 
- udelmall v.a.s. (weapon) is to be aimed; is to be focused on or at; 
- uldalem v.r.s. (weapon) aimed; focused on or at; 
- uldellomel (a rengul) v.r.s. responsible; purposeful; mature 
v omtebechel v.t. xx; watch over (child, etc.); act as guardian for; fix; standardize;
mtebechelii mtebechel miltebechelii miltebechel
- ultebechel v.r.s. xx; (person) certain or sure to; (person) serious or responsible; 
- utebechall v.a.s. is to be held steady, controlled, confirmed or moored 
p ultebechel a rengul/blekerdelel --honest; mature and responsible;
p ultebechel el tekoi --confirmed matter 
v olserechakl v.caus. step on (floor, ground, etc.) and make sound; walk slowly and stealthily; keep a secret; 
oserecheklii oserechakl ulserecheklii ulserechakl
- ulserechakl v.r.s. stepped on (and giving off sound);
p ulserechakl a rengul --calm; unexcitable
w selorech (a rengul) v.s. condescending
w sengok (a rengul) v.s. curious
v ouuchel v.t. xx; 
p ouuchel er a rengul --regret 
v outekangel v.i. xx; take the trouble to do smth; make special effort to do smth; v.t. argue with; argue down; 
mtekengelii mtekangel miltekengelii miltekangel 
- ultekangel v.r.s. argued with;
p outekangel er a rengul --persevere; force (oneself) to do smth;
e Moutekangel e ng kmeda a meched. --Don't give up - things will improve (lit. shallow water is approaching).
w oubuch v.i. xx; be a partner to; (substance) require use with (other substance) to be effective;
p oubuch a rengul --treat person as if he or she were one's spouse;
e A Droteo a oubuch a rengul er a Toki. --Droteo treats Toki as if she were his wife.
e Tia el kar a oubuch er a daob. --This medicine must be used with salt water (to be effective). 
w orkedellel n.a.s.oblig.poss.3sg. brace; support; handle; anything to grasp onto;
p orkedellel a uingel --braces on teeth 
v orreked v.t. xx;
- orekodel/orekedall v.a.s. is to be held onto or grasped;
- urreked v.r.s. held onto; grasped; 
p orreked er a rengul --restrain or control (oneself) (esp., from showing anger) 
w ongemengemek (a rengul) v.i.redup. keep grunting 
v omult v.t. turn over or inside out; turn (oneself) around; translate; interprete;
meltii mult mileltii milult 
p omult er a rengul --convince; persuade
w omud (a rengul) v.s. fed up with; exasperated; can't stand
v omeksebek (er a rengul) v.caus. worry (deliberately);
meksebekii meksebek mileksebekii mileksebek 
- uksebekall v.a.s. is to be made to fly;
- uleksebek v.r.s. made to fly
v omech v.t. xx; provide (oneself, others) with adequate supply, shelter, etc. emergency or other contingency; tide over; 
- bechoel v.a.s. is to be connected; 
- blechoel v.r.s. connected with a joint; always; do habitually; invariably do; 
p omech er a rengul/klengerenger --take the edge of one's hunger;
p omech a beluu --connect two areas (with bridge, etc.);
e Ak blechoel el meruul a kelel a Droteo. --I always prepare Droteo's food.
e A Toki a mle blechoel el meleng el udoud. --Toki always used to borrow money.
e A John a blechoel el diak losuub. --John never studies. 
e Ak omech er a Masaharu a lebo er a honto e obengkel. --I'm waiting for Masaharu so he can take me to Babeldaob with him.
e Tia el blai a rruul el omech er kid a lebo letaifun. --This house is made so as to provide us with shelter during a typhoon.
e Aika a kelek el omech er ngak a kbo ksengerenger. --This is (my) food to tide me over in case I get hungry. 
w ulechel n.r.s.oblig.poss.3sg. heart; core
v omal (er a rengul) v.t. xx
w omai (er a rengul) v.t. hesitate; be unsure about 
w olsebokel n. place for flying kites
v olsebek v.caus. xx;
osebekii osebek ulsebekii ulsebek 
- osebekall v.a.s. is to be made to fly; 
- ulsebek v.r.s. made to fly 
p olsebek er a rengul --worry (unintentionally); startle
v olsiich v.caus. xx;
osichii osiich ulsichii ulsiich 
- osichall v.a.s. (nut, screw) is to be tightened;
- ulsiich v.r.s. (nut, screw) tightened 
p olsiich er a rengul --take pleasure in someone else's pain, difficulties, problems, etc. 
- olsebek er a rengul --worry (unintentionally); startle 
v omais v.t. xx;
- blais v.r.s. (knife) blunted; 
- obais v.erg. get blunted; 
p obais a rengul --get fed up with; become unable to cope with
w moalech v.s. (leaves, stem of pepper leaf) withered; (facial expression) showing disappointment;
p moalech a rengul --disappointed; dismayed
w metitngall (a rengul) v.s. lonesome; sad (at broken friendship)
w ringel n. xx;
p meringel a rengul --feel bad about (smth wasted); (smth wasted) arouse sympathy
w saul n. xx;
p mesaul a rengul --not feel like
v mesubed v.t. xx;
p mesubed a rengul --accept; be resigned to; learn a lesson; learn from experience 
v menglou v.t. xx; increase in size;
- kilungall v.a.s. is to be enlarged or increased in size; 
p menglou er a rengul --try to make (someone, oneself) patient; assure; take edge of one's hunger;
p menglou er a ngerel --brag; boast; have a big mouth 
v mengurs v.t. xx;
p mengurs er a rengul --attract
w llomes n. xx;
p mellomes a rengul --smart; intelligent
w mechas n. xx;
p mechas a rengul --xx; (get) astonished
w bechelechelingaol a rengul v.s. xx; greedy; stingy; self-centered 
w mengesib v.t. xx;
- bekesbesib a rengul --xx; easily angered; touchy; 
w kekuii v.s. xx;
- bekokuii (a rengul) v.s. xx
w ralm n. xx;
- beralm a rengul v.s. xx; unconcerned; uncaring 
w diak v.s. xx;
p diak lemesim a rengul --stick to one's convictions; not change one's mind
w reng n. turmeric (grated and boiled with oil and used as women's skin treatment)
w renged n. xx; hamlet belonging to a particular municipality; reign; authority; 
rengedel n.poss.3sg.
v merenged v.t. tie or bind (long objects) together; join; make (relationship) closer;
rongedii remenged rirengedii rirenged
- rengodel v.a.s. (long objects) are to be tied together; 
- rrenged/rrengodel v.r.s. (long object) tied together; joined 
p Renged er a chol --hamlet in Ngerard;
p chad er a ta el renged --members of the same religious group; inhabitants of hamlets belonging to same municipality;
e Ng ngar er ngii a elolem el rengedel a Ngchesar. --There are six hamlets in Ngchesar.
e Ak merenged er a biskelengek. --I'm tying my spear (i.e. tying the metal point to the bamboo pole).
w orengodel n. horizontal roof beam of bai or house;
p uchul a orengodel --part of house where orengodel beam is first laid;
p rsel a orengodel --corner of house diagonally opposite from uchul a orengodel where cooking is done 
v meringet v.t. xx;
- rengetall/rengotel v.a.s. is to be chewed or crushed;
- rringet v.r.s. chewed; crushed
p meringet a bad el mesil --rock-crushing machine; 
p meringet a deb el mesil --sugarcane-crushing machine 
w oringet n. any instrument of crushing (esp., betel nut);
orengetel n.poss.3sg. 
p oringet er a chemachel --tool/pliers for crushing betel nut 
v merenguus v.t. put pomade, etc. (on hair); use (pomade, etc.) for hair; 
rungsii renguus rirengsii rirenguus
- kerenguus v.recip. put pomade on each other's hair; 
- rengsall v.a.s. (hair) is to be pomaded;
- rrenguus v.r.s. (hair) pomaded
w Rengulbai n. title of chiefs in Imeliik
w renguokl n.a.s. pimple; acne;
- bekerenguokl v.s. pimply
w reongel n. distance between ends of two outstretched arms
w rerechuchel v.s.redup. easily excited or made nervous
w rerengel n.oblig.poss.3sg. xx;
p rerengel a sils --ray of sun;
p rerengel a buil --moonbeam;
p rerengel a ngau --glow of fire
v merar  v.t. heat (food) so as not to spoil; warm (hands, etc.) over or next to fire; heat (leaves, etc.) over fire;
rorengii remar rirrengii rirar
- rerongel v.a.s. (food) is to be heated so as not to spoil; (hands, etc.) are to be warmed over or next to fire;
- rrar v.r.s. (food) heated so as not to spoil; (hands, etc.) warmed over or next to fire;
p merar a medal --get very embarrassed
w restorangd [from Eng.] n. restaurant
v merutech v.t. touch; try out;
rutechii remutech rirtechii rirutech 
- reterutech v.s.redup. prone to touching people (sexually); lecherous; prone to touching things (esp., out of curiosity);
- rrutech v.r.s. touched; 
- rtachel/rtochel/rtuchel v.a.s. is to be touched; 
- rutertechii v.s.redup. slow in accomplishing task, etc.; inefficient; 
- sekerutech v.s. prone to touching people (sexually); lecherous; prone to touching things (esp., out of curiosity)
w rtochel n.a.s. log dividing front of fireplace from rest of house of bai 
w riamel n. xx;
- bekeriamel v.s. smell like football fruit; sweaty; have a strong body odor (esp., as result of diet or poor hygiene)
w ribarb n. boastful; bragging; deceptive; prone to fabricating or inventing stories; prone to taking undue credit for
v orriid v.caus. xx;
oridii orriid urridii urriid
- oridall v.a.s. (someone's) departure is to be awaited; 
- urriid v.r.s. lost
w rikr n. syn. iikr
w ringel n. xx; strength (of wind); turbulence or roughness (of ocean);
w meringel n. hard liquor; pepper; red or green pepper;
merengelel n.poss.3sg. most difficult part (of work, etc.) 
v omekringel v.caus. xx;
mekrengelii mekringel milekrengelii milekringel 
w orringel (er a tekoi) v.caus. xx
w orringel v.i. move (e.g., run, paddle boat, etc.) fast
w -rir poss.suffix. 3rd pers.human.pl. their
w riuch n. type of tree
v meruoru v.t. xx;
riuruii riuoru riruruii riruoru 
- riuerall v.a.s. is to be fanned;
- rruoru v.r.s. fanned
w oruoru n. fan; piece of paper, etc. used as fan;
oruereul n.poss.3sg. 
p mekurs a oruoru --action begins 
w roklel n.oblig.poss.3sg. sound of rattling
w merroakl v.t. xx
w rodech n. xx; seed pod; 
p redechel a char --very small sea cucumber
w roech n. type of fish
w Rois n. hamlet in Ngeaur
w Roisechesar n. mountain in Ngchesar
w oketa mod. each one (individually);
e Te oketa mlo er a chei. --They each went fishing.
e A rengelekek a oketa mla mo chachiuaiu. --My children have each gone to sleep.
e Te oketa mlo kaingesengasech er a bilas e merael. --They each scrambled onto the boat and then they left. 
w roketa mod. syn. oketa
v merekui v.t. xx;
p rokui el taem --all the time; always;
e Ak ngilelmii a biang el rokir. --I drank up the whole bottle of beer.
e Ak ngilim a biang el rokui. --I drank up all the bottles of beer. 
e A bilek a mla mo dekimes el rokir. --This shirt of mine has gotten totally soaked.
e A bilek a mla mo dekimes el rokui. --All my clothes has gotten totally soaked. 
w orrenges v.t. xx;
e A Droteo a rongerenges tekoi. --Droteo is a cooperative or agreeable person.
e Ak ko el rongesa a chais. --I've just heard the news.
w roro n. Indian coral tree
v merot v.t. xx smth against solid surface; pound out (spearhead);
- rtangel v.a.s. is to be pounded, smashed or crushed
w rongel n.oblig.poss.3sg. xx;
p rongel a sils --reflected light of sun at dawn or sunset;
p rongel a buil --reflected light of moon (e.g., when moon is behind trees, mountain, etc.)
w roureur v.s. be everywhere; be pervasive
w rusel n.oblig.poss.3sg. action of distributing
v merous v.t. divide up; distribute;
rousii/rusii remous rirusii rirous 
- rrous/rruikl v.r.s. divided up; distributed;
- rrurous v.r.s.redup. sorted out; 
- ruikl/rusall v.a.s. is to be divided up or distributed
w ruklel n.a.s.oblig.poss.3sg. share; portion 
w omerous n. distribution;
omerusel n.poss.3sg. 
p omerusel a kall --distribution of food 
w merurous v.t.redup. keep distributing 
w oruikl n. basket
w rrang n. syn. rrach
w omekerrau (er a rengul) v.caus. confuse; puzzle
w merderad v.t.redup. xx;
- rrederad v.r.s. (flowers, etc.) picked here and there
v merterot v.t.redup. pound or smash in several places; v.erg.redup. get pounded or smashed in several places; 
rotertengii roterot rirtertengii rireterot
- rreterot v.r.s. pounded or smashed in several places
v meridm v.t. harvest (fruit, esp., bananas);
ridmii ruidm riredmii riridm
- rridm v.r.s. (fruit) harvested
v meriik v.t. xx;
- medideriik v.s.redup. xx; (persons) broke or out of money; 
- rriik v.r.s. swept
w oriik n. xx;
p oriik er a iikr --rake;
p oriik er a ulaol --broom for the floor;
p oriik er a ochertoll --broom for the toilet
w rriil n. sandy beach above high water mark
v meriim v.t. collect or gather and transport; v.i. move one's residence; 
riiemii ruiim ririmii ririim
- riomel/rimall v.a.s. xx;
- rriim/rriomel v.r.s. collected or gathered and transported
w orisu n. water for rinsing;
orsuel n.poss.3sg.
p orsuel a oach --water for rinsing feet
v merisu v.t. xx (hands, feet, vegetables, etc.); wash off (floor);
- rrisu v.r.s. washed or rinsed off;
- rsoal/rsool v.a.s. is to be washed or rinsed off
w orsoal/orsool n. water basin (for rinsing)
w rrom n. xx;
e A Droteo a mlad er a rrom. --Droteo got so drunk (that he didn't know what he was doing, etc.).
w rrou (a rengul) v.s. suddenly confused or perplexed
w rrull n. rayfish
w rrulluriul n. type of shark
v merus v.t. xx;
rusur remus rirsur rirus
- rrus v.r.s. pierced; stabbed; injected; inoculated; 
- rsull v.a.s. is to be pierced, stabbed, injected or inoculated;
e Te rirsur er a omechiuaiu. --They gave him an injection to put him to sleep./They anaesthetized him.
w rrusech n. spiny (poisonous) sea urchin
v merusech v.t. xx;
- rrusech v.r.s. (food, betel nut, medicine) pounded; punched;
- rsachel v.a.s. (food, betel nut, medicine) is to be pounded; is to be punched;
p merusech a rengul --repentant 
v meruu v.t. xx;
- rruu v.r.s. collected; gathered;
- ruaol v.a.s. is to be collected or gathered 
p rruu el klalo --smth found and kept
v meruul v.t. xx; make/cause (someone, to do smth);
- rruul v.r.s. xx; (person) born to or made for; (person) trained or conditioned (to do smth);
p meruul a tekoi --speak or behave as if nothing is wrong;
p meruul a klengit --commit sin;
p meruul a klungiaol --do smth good or helpful;
p meruul a delengerenger --commit mischief; break the law;
p meruul a kldung --perform one's obligations; uphold the law;
p meruul a temall --perform black magic;
p rullii besul --make (oneself) comfortable (for eating, sleeping, etc.); get (oneself) ready;
e A ngelekel a rruul el diak loleb a tekoi. --Her child is trained not to interrupt people.
e A chad a rruul el mo songerenger. --Human beings are made or born to be hungry. 
w orellel n.oblig.poss.3sg. way of making or repairing
w rruul n. xx;
e A rrellel a Droteo a blechoel el ungil. --Droteo always makes things well.
w rsaol n. border between deep and shallow areas of sea
w rsel n.oblig.poss.3sg. end;
p rsel a kerrekar --top of the tree;
p rsel a kerreel --(other) end of the string; 
p rsel a cheldecheduch --end of the meeting; 
p rsel a chim --end of the arm;
p rsel a oach --end of the foot;
p rsel a ureor --end of work
w rserus n. cigar
w Rteluul n. old name for Ngerechelong
w rtertiil n. peperomia plant
w rua xx;
e Tirke el teru el chad te rua techang? --Who are those two people (i.e. what are their names)?
e Ak milsterir a rua Toki er a stoang. --I saw Toki and her friends at the store.
w orrabs v.caus. xx
v ruames v.i. xx;
e Alii. Ke di ocherchur el mo el ruames. --Watch out - you're laughing so hard you'll split your sides.
w rubak n. xx;
- bekerubak v.s. smell like an old man;
- rubekngang v.s.inch. becoming an old man; 
p rubak er ngak --my husband;
p demal el rubak --(someone's) grandfather;
p rubak er kemam --husband of one of my relatives; father-in-law;
p rubak er a eanged --god;
p loia a rurt (el) rubak --half-walk and half-run; walk (like an old man) with a determined gait
w ourubak v.t. act like an old man; have a husband
w rubekul n.oblig.poss.3sg. xx;
p rubekul a Belau --elders of Palau
w ruchel n. demigod
w ruchelel n.poss.pl. ancestors
v orrechorech v.caus. xx;
orecherechii orechorech urrecherechii urrechorech 
- orecherechall v.a.s. is to be sunk;
- urrechorech v.r.s. sunk;
p orrechorech a rengul --extremely angry; wild with anger
w ruetuu n. rayfish
w Ruk n. Truk;
- rechiruk n.pl. Trukese people;
- ouruk v.i. do a man's dance
w rur n. xx;
- kerur v.recip. bashful with each other (esp., when first meeting);
- merur v.s.t. ashamed of; shy; bashful or timid about; afraid of;
- merrengang v.s.t.inch. is getting ashamed of; 
- sekerur v.s. syn. sekemerur
p ng diak a rrengel --unreserved; uninhibited; direct; not afraid to speak one's mind;
e A Droteo a mle merur er a ngelekel. --Droteo was ashamed of his child. 
w rurt n. running; race; 
rertel n.poss.3sg. 
- sekerurt/sekederurt/sekaiderurt v.s. run a lot;
p loia a rurt (el) rubak --half-walk and half-run; walk (like an old man) with a determined gait
v orrurt v.t. xx;
orretii orrurt urretii urrurt
w ruumk v.i. xx; get weighted down
v orrumk v.t. xx;
- oremkall v.a.s. (boat, etc.) is to be weighed down 
w orrumk n. weight on fishnet; anchor 
